We scientists (students and staff alike) are a bit of a peculiar group. We are not only united by our common interest in science, but we are also quite intelligent. Nearly 50 years ago it has been established that the education system does not adequately support highly intelligent children, which can lead to psychological damage and permanent impairment (Marland report). While this finding spurred the establishment of “Gifted and Talented Programs” in schools throughout the US and elsewhere (ref), there is still a lack of understanding for the psychological and emotional needs of highly intelligent people (e.g. Petterson 09, https://doi.org/10.1177/0016986209346946), even within the education sector (ref) and psychology (10.1177/0098628320901381 ). Here we shortly review the psychological, emotional and social difficulties of highly intelligent children, and then discuss how adverse schooling experiences and high cognitive abilities may impact mental health and careers at university. Lastly, we will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of enrichment and acceleration measures (“honors” courses) in tertiary education.

**Definition(s) of intelligence, IQ and giftedness**  
Intelligence is a complex construct that eludes a clear and commonly accepted definition (Apa knowns and unknowns). In very general terms intelligence is the ability to solve problems (Gardner 1983). Intelligence is distinct from specific skills and achievements, but rather refers to a cognitive potential [ a bit more in depth needed here]. An individual’s intelligence is usually expressed in relation to the population mean (the IQ). Short paragraph about the IQ, its eugenic history, cultural differences and problems in assessing IQ of “non-white” or neurodiverse people. These problems in assessing intelligence notwithstanding, intelligence is one of the best available psychometric predictors, correlating in general with academic success, income etc. 
Individuals with an IQ of at least 2 standard deviations above the mean (130) are commonly called intellectually “gifted”. However, depending on the definition, “gifted” may also mean a combination of high intelligence, motivation and academic achievement, as well as talents other than cognitive abilities (e.g. musical, creative…). To avoid confusion, we will avoid the term “gifted” in the remainder of this essay and instead refer only to highly intelligent individuals. Although we see the utility of IQ tests as psychodiagnostics tools, we wish to clarify that a formal test is not necessary to classify someone as highly intelligent (especially given the limitations and biases of the IQ test). 

**School**  
The education system is built on groups, which naturally makes it difficult for those that are far away from the mean. And this includes children and adults who are much more intelligent than the mean. In short, highly intelligent individuals are a very diverse groups and so are their challenges, but common ones are perfectionism, social isolation, and underachievement. Perfectionism is a side-effect of the ability for critical thinking; social isolation may result from having no “like-minded” peers around; and underachievement can occur when the environment cannot provide the ressources necessary to keep up with one’s intellectual development.  A sustained lack of intellectual challenges may then lead to loss of motivation and prevent building crucial self-regulation skills and learning habits, and often to drop-out from school or college. Thus, many highly intelligent children or adolescents face significant challenges in the education system, precisely because of their high intelligence. Whether these challenges increase the risk of psychological disorders, in comparison to the population mean, is still under debate, however (ref)… 
Misdiagnoses of highly intelligent children are common [elaborate here why ADHD, oppositional defiant disorder and similar could be confused with high intelligence – webbs standard ref on dual diagnosis and misdiagnosis]. Highly intelligent children from minorities are particularly likely to remain undiagnosed or misdiagnosed and less likely to enrol in special enrichment programs or schools (particularly in the USA), so the gap between intellectual potential and provided resources is even greater. On the other hand, learning disorders etc frequently go undiagnosed… 
Possibly add  socio-emotional problems of twice-exceptional children.

**The IQ of scientists**  
As established in the preceding section, high intelligence can lead to social, emotional and psychological problems. Extremely high intelligence is, by definition, rare (two sd above the mean means 2.3 %), but academics are hardly a representative sample of the population. To assess how common giftedness at universities, we searched for published studies on the IQ of students or staff.
I searched for publications in WoS on 13.11.2020 with the following search string:  

*((TI = intelligence NOT TI =( intelligence near/1 (artificial or emotional or business or social or cultural or spiritual) ))  OR  TS  =  IQ)  AND  TS=  ((Universit* OR college$ OR honor$ OR honour$)  and  (student$ or staff or scientist$)  )*  

To be found by this search string, a publication needs to fulfil three conditions:  
1)  mention "university", "college" or "hono(u)rs", in title, abstract or keywords, AND  
2)  mention "student", "staff" or "scientist" in title, abstract or keywords, AND  

3a) mention IQ in in title, abstract or keywords, OR  
3b) mention intelligence in the title, but not "artificial intelligence", "emotial intelligence" or similar terms  

I found 651 studies of potential relevance. Based on some scoping [looking into a subset of the data], I’m expecting to find around 28 to 40 studies with usable data, and the search should take some 20-30 work hours (plus data extraction and analysis). Full scoping details are attached to the end.
Wit this data one could make a figure about mean iq, potentially by subject and “age” of the student cohort (i.e. no of years at university). I’d expect an IQ somewhere around 115 maybe, increasing with “age” as those with lower IQ are more likely to leave university. I doubt that highly intelligent underachievers that leave university would reverse the general increase of mean IQ with career (at least I hope so!). I think that the data should allow predictions about the mean, but I’m not sure there is enough data for a subject-and age-specific IQ. Would really depend on whether the authors are willing to share individual-level data. Not sure whether such an analyiss is necessary and helpful though.  

**Implications for university life**  
We established that students tend to be intelligent, and that many highly intelligent people are prone to developing mental or social problems if not receiving adequate education. Hence it follows that the problem has relevance for our everyday university teaching as well. Our starting conditions are, however different from those of schools. First, the geographical background (district, state and country) of students is more diverse than that of typical primary or secondary schools, so the students are more likely to differ in the degree of socio-emotional and academic support they received. Secondly, problems have formed and were reinforced over years of schooling, making them more difficult to revert. Thirdly, there are unique challenges, particularly for first-year students that are not directly comparable to those of primary and secondary school (e.g. BFLPE and impostor syndrome, financial insecurities, lack of support network). Taken together, these issues intensify the need for measures at university.
In higher education systems of some countries so called “honors” programmes are common… explanation and explaining why they are important for highly intelligent students. Important source is this one: (https://doi.org/10.1177/0162353219855678). Main findings: many honors students are perfectionists, some underachieving; honors courses help them in general. 
However, admission to honors programmes often depends on grades and achievements. Furthermore, the program names often convey “excellence”, “elite”, “talent” and other exclusive terms that may deter students with impostor syndrome and low self-esteem. I think that many highly intelligent but underachieving students may often not end up in honors courses, especially twice-exceptional students and minorities (depends obviously on assessment procedure). Obviously it would be good if we had data on that. So, hypothesis: students in honors score better on underachievement/perfectionism/self-worth scales than students with similar intelligence in non-honors courses.
This question needs an assessment of IQ of honors students and of students taking standard degrees. Hence I searched for:  

*(TS = ( IQ OR "intelligence quotient" OR Raven OR Wechsler OR WAIS OR Catell OR reynolds OR Binet OR Woodcock OR "cognitive assessment system" OR naglieri)  ) *  

And found 150469 articles. Refining to  

*#1  AND  TS  =  hono$r*  
   
Yielded 50 studies, but none was relevant. Could well be that there are many more studies out there, but that would require a different search strategy and possibly a different database. With the data I found it is impossible to say whether honor programs actually select the most intelligent students. 
The other ingredient for the hypothesis is the response variable:  

*TS  =(Depress*  or  anxiety  OR  suicid*  OR  perfectionis*  OR  underachiev*)*  869153 results  
*TS  =  ((social OR emotional OR mental OR psychological)  NEAR/1  (Health or well$being)  )* 258169  
*(#1 OR #2)  AND  TS=  (college OR universit* OR (("post-secondary" OR higher OR tertiary)  NEAR/1  education)*  )  AND  TS  =  (students OR staff)  25656  
*#3  AND  TS  =  hono$r  36  *

A few are actually relevant so this is slightly better, and there are some more in the review paper (https://doi.org/10.1177/0162353219855678). But as said, a better search strategy could find more results. Altenratively the main take-home message is simply that we cannot know because there is no research on that topic yet. 
I also had a look whether I can find more studies on highly intelligent students, include those that are not in honors courses, or in different countries (the other review is only US based):   

*TS=  ( (Gifted OR talented OR hono$r OR early entrance OR IQ OR Intelligence near/1 quotient OR accelerated near Education or enrichment)  AND  (college OR universit*) ) [7444 entries].   *
*#1  AND  TS  =(Depress*  or  anxiety  OR  suicid*  OR  perfectionis*  OR  underachiev*)  [239]   *
*#1  AND  TS  =  ((social OR emotional OR mental OR psychological)  NEAR/1  (Health or well$being) )  [94]  *

In total I found 301 articles of potential relevance (after removing doubles). I focussed only on articles describing issues related to mental health and career prospectives of university students, thereby excluding articles that focus on the transition to university. After screening titles, 72 articles remained, and 35 were chosen for further evaluation based on their abstracts. 
Most of the studies were not already included in the other review (linked above). The study subjects of 18 studies were drawn from programs for gifted students (15 from honors courses or other forms of university enrichment, 1 from early entrance program, 2 from gifted school programs), compared to only 3 studies that drew subjects from the standard curriculum. Further 8 studies used study subjects with a known condition (2 studies on autism spectrum disorder, 1 each for depression, twice-exceptionals, underachievers, schizophrenia, hard of hearing). Obviously, this is still a strongly biased study population, as nearly all results come from students that received some form of accommodation, and whose needs have been reckognized. Nevertheless, the studies mention the potential for severe psychological conditions that may hamper or destroy a budding career (perfectionism, suicidal ideation, depression), and a relief from some of these stressors when placed in an honors program; though 2 studies show increased stress after accelerated placement or placement in Australian honors (dental medicine) program. I haven’t actually read those articles yet, but I guess one could summarize them in a table or similar. 
The numbers above do not add up to 35. The remaining ones are reviews(1) or did not say in the abstract (6). I did not read the papers so some may be irrelevant, but I guess the numbers are more or less representative.
*Conclusion*  

It is incredibly difficult to spot highly intelligent individuals. Neither past achievement nor IQ-tests (see “race” gaps, autism etc) can provide full information about a students intellectual potential. It requires training, open-mindedness, and resources to spot talented students. But it’s worth it. Actually, it’s our job.  

 
**Here’s the scoping for the IQ-thing:**
I assessed the titles of 333 of the 651 articles and found 125 articles of potential relevance (37.5%). I then chose 60 of these 125 articles and read the abstracts; 43 of these were potentially relevant (71.6%). Based on these values I expect 175 relevant articles in the dataset.
I searched the full text of the latest 18 articles that appeared relevant based on title and abstract. I could not retrieve one article (in russian language), and 1 article was under investigation by the editorial board. 7 out of the remaining 16 articles were still deemed relevant after reading the full text. 2 of these studies regard only IQ subtests, and 2 (1 subtest, 1 full) do not provide data about mean IQ and SD. 1 study was performed on students with learning disabilities and may need to be removed. Assuming that 1 out of 18 articles is not available, 9 out of 16 not relevant after full text assessment, and 3 out of 7 do not include full valid data (subtests or unique study populations), I expect 40 studies to be included in the meta-analysis. Should researchers be unwilling to share their data, the number of studies may drop to 28. These are very approximate values only.
Under the assumption that it takes 30 seconds to read a title, 180 seconds to screen an abstract, and on average 5 minutes to locate, screen the methods, and potentially read a paper,  the remaining search should take 159 + 276 +785 = 1220 minutes, or 20 work hours 

